Add blog post about CHERI and safe languages. (#14)
CHERIoT-Platform/CHERIoT-Platform.github.io: _posts/2024-08-27-cheri-myths-safe-languages.markdown

---
layout: post

> title:  "CHERI Myths: I don't need CHERI if I have safe languages"

Reviewer: Pedantic: this is only one myth. Plural is ok for category but doesn't work for the title. Same for writing cheri c post.

date:   2024-08-27
categories: cheri myths
author: David Chisnall
---

There's a recurring myth that CHERI and safe languages are solving the same problems and that, if you have one, you don't need the other.

> When I joined the CHERI project in 2012, my primary motivation was producing hardware that enabled safe interoperability between languages, so I never felt that safe languages and CHERI were in tension.
> Quite the reverse: My work on CHERI was motivated by a desire to enable safe language adoption.

Reviewer 2: I feel like this buries the lede under anecdote that might not hook the reader.  Maybe...

```suggestion
Depending on one's preferred side, the arguments go something like:
* "CHERI enables converting confidentiality- or integrity-violating memory safety problems to deterministic crashes, what more could one want?", or
* "Safe languages completely rule out memory safety bugs for code written in any one of those languages, so what's left?"
To which the answers are:
* Availability matters, too!  Being able to prove statically the absence of, or recover dynamically from, failures requires a significantly revised _programming model_, more than "just add CHERI flavoring".
* There are _multiple_ safe languages, and they may need to interoperate within one program!  Each safe language should view, at least, the _unsafe_ runtime of the others (as well as any "native code") with skepticism.
CHERI and safe languages are two great advances that go great together.
Let's go through that in more detail.
```

The [CrowdStrike incident](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CrowdStrike#2024_CrowdStrike_incident), which also cost billions of dollars, was the result of an uninitialised-use bug (compounded by a lot of operational failures).

Memory-safety bugs are particularly bad because they step outside of the language's abstract machine.
After a program passes a memory-safety bug, it may do anything.
It may access objects that should not be reachable, modify immutable objects, and even execute instructions out of sequence to do things that are not part of the source-code description of what the program should do at all.

A single memory-safety bug can be all that an attacker needs to get an arbitrary-code execution exploit.
Rewriting 99% of a program in a safe language but leaving just one memory-safety bug does not prevent at-scale deployment of malware.

This was one of the problems that CHERI aimed to solve, in two ways.
At the fine granularity, CHERI offers language-agnostic memory safety primitives.
Compilers can generate, or humans can write, assembler making use of these primitives to capture and then enforce memory safety of source-level objects.

> The switcher is the most privileged part of a CHERIoT system and is written in assembly (it has to do things like save all registers, which are not possible in any high-level language).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The switcher, for example, is the most privileged part of a CHERIoT system and is written in assembly (it has to do things like save all registers, which are not possible in any high-level language).
```

In spite of its privilege, it remains bound by the memory-safety rules.
It cannot access any compartments other than the caller and callee.
It cannot access any memory other than that reachable from the registers when it is invoked and its internal state, unlike a traditional OS kernel that can access anything.

Enforcing these guarantees in the hardware makes it possible for safe-language code to call unsafe or, most excitingly, _differently_ safe code and yet still enforce source-level properties.
Consider a single program composed of code written in all of Rust, Java, and Haskell.
Each is in the 'safe languages' category, but provides different guarantees.
Rust code passing a borrowed reference to Java may wish to ensure that it isn't captured, a property that CHERIoT can enforce directly (or CHERI can enforce with indirection).
Haskell passing an object to Java or Rust may wish to guarantee deep immutability, a property that CHERIoT and all Morello or later CHERI platforms can enforce.

> 

Reviewer 2: I think there should be something around here (or back a paragraph or two) to remind that CHERI catches would-be memory safety violations _before_ they happen, enabling recovery within the abstract machine's semantics.

At a coarser granularity, CHERI makes it easy to sandbox entire unsafe components.
You can take a C library and put it in an isolated compartment.

> This is closely related to the fine-grained guarantees because, even if the unsafe library has a private heap, you are going to want to share some objects with it.

Reviewer 2: That sentence seems out of place; maybe just strike it in favor of one at the end of the paragraph, after the example, along the lines of "CHERI enables controlled, cross-language, cross-failure-domain, cross-trust-boundary sharing of _individual source-level objects_ rather than of awkward, more lower-level concepts like pages."

Compression libraries are among the simplest to sandbox: they have a simple interface that takes an input buffer and provides an output buffer.
CHERI makes it easy to provide a read-only view of an input buffer (avoiding the need to copy) and a write-only output buffer.

In the CHERIoT network stack, we take advantage of this between the TLS and TCP/IP compartments.
The TLS stack maintains its own ring buffers for messages.
When it calls into the TCP/IP stack to receive some data, it passes a bounded capability to a subset of the buffer, with write-only, no-capture permissions.
By the end of the call, the TLS stack knows that the TCP/IP stack doesn't have access to the buffer and can't have leaked any stale data in there.
The TLS compartment contains BearSSL, which is mostly written in a domain-specific language that compiles down to C for side-channel-resistant crypto routines, but the same guarantees are available to any language that can target the platform.

# Rewriting has an opportunity cost, if it's possible at all

> There's a pervasive narrative in some camps that rewriting everything in a safe language is the path to fixing security.

Reviewer 2: I kinda think this section wants to have four sub-sections?
* Expense
* New bugs in rewrites
* Desirability of rewrites ("`ffmpeg` sure is fast; do you want to do all that again?")
* Feasibility of rewrites (TCB intrinsic unsafety)

Just looking at open source code, there are around ten billion lines of C/C++ code.
It's not clear how much more exists in proprietary projects.
Optimistically, the cost of rewriting all of this is hundreds of billions to trillions of dollars.

That's a lot, but most importantly, it's investment that takes away from writing new code.
If one team decides to spend a year rewriting a new project and another spends the year writing new code that adds new features, which do you think will be more successful in the market?
Rewriting code with no user-visible benefits is not likely to drive sales.

> Which team will have fewer bugs in their codebase?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Moreover, which team will have fewer bugs in their codebase?
```

If you rewrite existing code in a safe language then you can guarantee, by construction, that the code does not have bugs in the category that the language enforces.

> There is a big difference between 'memory safe' and 'correct'.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
And it is indisputably more efficient to catch issues with the aid of a compiler rather that through run-time testing.
The paradigm shift modern languages provide from "if it compiles, I can test it" to "if it compiles, I know it is memory safe" is significant and valuable. 
There is a big difference between 'memory safe' and 'correct'.
```

All of this is assuming that rewriting is possible.
A lot of TCB code is intrinsically unsafe.
A memory allocator, for example, defines the notion of a heap object and so must sit below the abstraction of any notion of memory safety.
The same is true of any part of an OS kernel that has views of userspace memory.
These can definitely be made *safer*, but not safe.

Writing new code that solves new problems, of course, doesn't come with opportunity cost concerns.
If you can write *new* code in a safe language, especially a safe language that improves developer productivity, then that's an obvious win.

# CHERI does not fix bugs for you

CHERI doesn't guarantee that your code is free from memory-safety errors, it guarantees that any memory-safety bugs will trap and not affect confidentiality or integrity of your program.
With compartmentalisation, components can be isolated into separate failure domains, which improves reliability a lot.

> For example, a memory-safety bug in our TCP/IP compartment will trigger a reset of that compartment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, a memory-safety bug in our TCP/IP compartment will, through careful software artifice co-designed with CHERI and CHERIoT, trigger a reset of that compartment.
```

The Java VM is infamous for security vulnerabilities that allow programs to break type safety in various ways.

The more complex a type system is, whether it's enforced statically or dynamically, the more likely that there will be a bug that allows an attacker to exploit it.
When you're pulling in a million-line dependency, auditing it to make sure that it doesn't trigger such a vulnerability is impossible.

Java shipped with a lot of complex infrastructure for sandboxing components.
The [`SecurityManager`](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/lang/SecurityManager.html) let you restrict the privileges of running code and elevate privileges later.
This depended on the correctness of most of the rest of the JVM.
In Android, Google removed it (technically it's still there, you just got an exception if you installed a non-default policy) and made the process boundary the only security boundary.
They did this because anything that depends on the correctness of the entire JVM for security is likely to be broken.
The same rationale should apply to compartmentalisation models that rely on other languages' type-safety guarantees.

> Using CHERI to isolate parts of the supply chain does not have this problem.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With CHERI, we can solve this problem by _isolating_ parts from the supply chain.
```

> The security properties of a CHERI ISA are simple and local.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The security properties of a CHERI ISA are simple and local (and used by software to build larger properties, compositionally).
```

They have been formally verified at the ISA level on two CHERI variants and the CHERIoT Ibex core has had its implementation formally verified.

> This is possible because the properties are simple (slightly oversimplifying):

Reviewer 2: I don't like the use of "simple" again, but I do not have a suggestion.

Reviewer 3: "because the properties can be expressed simply as:"

> This is possible because the properties are simple (slightly oversimplifying):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is possible because the properties can be expressed simply as:
```

 - All memory accesses require a capability with the right permissions.
 - Capability permissions may not increase.

> Beyond that, the TCB code that enforces higher-level properties such as compartment isolation, thread isolation, and no-capture guarantees (in combination with hardware) is only around 300 instructions on CHERIoT and so is also amenable to formal verification.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Beyond that, the TCB code that enforces higher-level properties such as compartment isolation, thread isolation, and no-capture guarantees (in combination with hardware) is only around 300 instructions on CHERIoT and so should also be amenable to formal verification.
```

> This means that you can have strong guarantees even when using malicious third-party code that exploits bugs in a type checker for a safe language.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This means that you can have strong run time guarantees even when using malicious third-party code that exploits bugs in a type checker for a safe language.
```

> This means that you can have strong guarantees even when using malicious third-party code that exploits bugs in a type checker for a safe language.
> These guarantees also apply to binary-only components, including ones written in unsafe languages.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As a result, the strong guarantees afforded by the TCB hold regardless of whether you are running compartments holding code that is...
* completely bug-free, statically proven correct in all regards,
* hand-written binary machine code with no safety properties whatsoever,
* malicious third-party code that exploits bugs in a type checker for a safe language,
* or anything in between.
```

> CHERI compartmentalisation is not just restricting the damage from memory-safety issues.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
CHERI compartmentalisation does not only restrict the damage from memory-safety issues.
```

The [`cheriot-audit` tool](https://github.com/CHERIoT-Platform/cheriot-audit) lets you audit exactly which things a compartment can do outside of itself in a CHERIoT firmware image (which functions it can call in other compartments, which pre-shared objects and memory-mapped I/O regions it can access and with which permissions).
You can reason about the damage from a compromise even if an attacker can gain arbitrary-code execution in a compartment.

> For supply-chain security, you want to assume that a third-party component is compromised and includes malicious code.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For supply-chain security, you should assume that a third-party component is compromised and includes malicious code.
```

CHERIoT lets you reason about what it can do in these cases.
In contrast, if a Java or Rust component is malicious and uses (intentional or otherwise) unsafe language features, it can to anything that the program can do.

# The future should be safe languages on CHERI

> CHERI and safe language give different sets of guarantees, but those guarantees *compose*.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
CHERI and safe language give different sets of guarantees, but those guarantees are complementary, not competing
```

# Safety is a property of entire programs

The [WannaCry ransomware attack](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WannaCry_ransomware_attack), which cost billions of dollars, was enabled by a single use-after-free bug.
The [CrowdStrike incident](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CrowdStrike#2024_CrowdStrike_incident), which also cost billions of dollars, was the result of an uninitialised-use bug (compounded by a lot of operational failures).

Memory-safety bugs are particularly bad because they step outside of the language's abstract machine.
After a program passes a memory-safety bug, it may do anything.
It may access objects that should not be reachable, modify immutable objects, and even execute instructions out of sequence to do things that are not part of the source-code description of what the program should do at all.

A single memory-safety bug can be all that an attacker needs to get an arbitrary-code execution exploit.
Rewriting 99% of a program in a safe language but leaving just one memory-safety bug does not prevent at-scale deployment of malware.

This was one of the problems that CHERI aimed to solve, in two ways.

> At the fine granularity, CHERI allows memory-safety properties to be enforced in every language.
> This includes assembly.

Reviewer 2: Maybe something like...

```suggestion
At the fine granularity, CHERI offers language-agnostic memory safety primitives.
Compilers can generate, or humans can write, assembler making use of these primitives to capture and then enforce memory safety of source-level objects.
```

The switcher is the most privileged part of a CHERIoT system and is written in assembly (it has to do things like save all registers, which are not possible in any high-level language).
In spite of its privilege, it remains bound by the memory-safety rules.
It cannot access any compartments other than the caller and callee.

> It cannot access any stacks other than the running one and the scheduler's interrupt stack.

Reviewer 2: The two examples are indeed memory safety properties, but I might want the connection spelled out in more detail: "Despite that the CHERIoT linker densely packs compartments' global sections, one next to the other, the switcher remains bound by CHERI's spatial rules and has access only to the caller and callee compartment.  Similarly, stacks are again arranged sequentially, but the switcher always has access to only two: the active one (in the register file) and the scheduler's interrupt stack (pointed to by the switcher's internal state)."

Author: How's that?

Reviewer 2: "And its internal state", right?

Enforcing these guarantees in the hardware makes it possible for safe-language code to call unsafe or differently safe code and enforce properties.
Differently safe is the most interesting case.
Consider Rust, Java, and Haskell.
Each is in the 'safe languages' category, but provides different guarantees.
Rust code passing a borrowed reference to Java may wish to ensure that it isn't captured, a property that CHERIoT can enforce.

> Haskell passing an object to Java or Rust may wish to guarantee deep immutability, a property that CHERIoT and all post-Morello CHERI platforms can enforce.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Haskell passing an object to Java or Rust may wish to guarantee deep immutability, a property that CHERIoT and all Morello or later CHERI platforms can enforce.
```

> Enforcing these guarantees in the hardware makes it possible for safe-language code to call unsafe or differently safe code and enforce properties.
> Differently safe is the most interesting case.
> Consider Rust, Java, and Haskell.
> Each is in the 'safe languages' category, but provides different guarantees.
> Rust code passing a borrowed reference to Java may wish to ensure that it isn't captured, a property that CHERIoT can enforce.
> Haskell passing an object to Java or Rust may wish to guarantee deep immutability, a property that CHERIoT and all Morello or later CHERI platforms can enforce.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Enforcing these guarantees in the hardware makes it possible for safe-language code to call unsafe or, most excitingly, _differently_ safe code and yet still enforce source-level properties.
Consider a single program composed of code written in all of Rust, Java, and Haskell.
Each is in the 'safe languages' category, but provides different guarantees.
Rust code passing a borrowed reference to Java may wish to ensure that it isn't captured, a property that CHERIoT can enforce directly (or CHERI can enforce with indirection).
Haskell passing an object to Java or Rust may wish to guarantee deep immutability, a property that CHERIoT and all Morello or later CHERI platforms can enforce.
```
